# RISC-V Assembly language programming
## History and Evolution of the RISC-V CPU
- At least one CPU is found at the heart of each computer. Modern computers have many CPUs; for instance a main CPUand several helper CPUs to offload tasks like network communications. Inside of SSDs, and HDDs, there is a CPU to read and store the data. 
- Early CPUs such as the IBM 360 mainframe, were large, complicated, and compried of thousands of discrete components. In 1971, Intel debuted the intel 4004, a single chip 4-bit CPU allowing the proliferating of handheld calculators. This lead to more advanced CPUs such as the MOS Technology 6502 which had the right combo of being both affordable and powerful enough to create the personal computer and video game industries like Apple II and Nintendo Entertainment System. 
- IBM entered the PC market in 1981, using the more complex intel 8088 CPU. This CPU was powerful and flexible with 16-bit addressing and variable length machine code instructions. This set forward te trend of a single-chip CPU adding complexity with the goal of becoming the mainframes on desktops. Intel quickly introduced new chips with more and more advanced functionalities to empower 32-bit and then 64-bit processing, vector operations, memory protection, multi-tasking, and more. Tis process added to the chips complexitity, as well as the underlying instruction set.
- Competitors saw this and thought they could compete withIntel's Complex Instruction Set Computer (CISC) by introducing simplified Reduced Instruction Set Computers (RISC). These computers wouldn't have the baggage of maintaining compatibilities with older chips, they would start out at 32- or 64-bits. Their instructions would be a fixed width and there would be fewer of them to allow faster instruction decoding. Each instruction would run in 1 clock cycle. Early RISC processors were typically used in high-end UNIX workstations, so consequently they never achieved the shipment volume and economies of scale to efficiectly compete with Intel. 
- In 1982, Acorn computers, which produced the BBC microcomputer, was lookig to upgrade their line of computers from using the now aging 6502. The engineers at Acorn did not want to move to the intel architecture and become another PC clone. Instead, they wanted the simplificity of the 6502 but modernized. They took the daring step of designing their own CPU, called the ARM CPU, based on the RISC Philosphy. 
