# CS 1114 Spring 2025 Syllabus

### Introduction to Software Design

## Instructors

Instructor Name | Class Location | Office Hours | Office Hours Location  
---|---|---|---  
[David
McPherson](/courses/204710/users/3036)([dmcphers@vt.edu](mailto:dmcphers@vt.edu))
| MW 11:15-12:05 (NCB 360)  
MW 1:25-2:15 (NCB 260) | Tuesday 1:30-3:30  
Thursday 1:30-3:30  
Other times: email for appointment | Torg 1220A  
[Onyeka Emebo](/courses/204710/users/174333)
([onyeka@vt.edu](mailto:onyeka@vt.edu)) | TR 3:30-4:20 (NCB 260)  
  
|  | Torg 1220D  
[Saad
Nizamani](/courses/204710/users/259311)([saadnizamani@vt.edu](mailto:saadnizamani@vt.edu))
| MW 4:00pm-4:50pm (NCB 260) | Wednesday 12:30-3:30 | MCB 122/A  
  
## Course description

Fundamental concepts of programming from an object-oriented perspective. Basic
software engineering principles and programming skills in a programming
language that supports the object-oriented paradigm. Simple data types,
control structures, array and string data structures, basic algorithms,
testing and debugging. A basic model of the computer as an abstract machine.
Modeling and problem-solving skills applicable to programming at this level.
Partially duplicates 1054, 1124, and 1705.

**Corequisite:** MATH 1225

**Textbook:** Provided online on Canvas.

**Textbook: optional:** _[Java, Java, Java: Object-Oriented Problem Solving,
3/E](http://www.cs.trincoll.edu/~ram/jjj/) _, Ralph Morelli and Ralph Walde,
2012 [Available for free online].

**Textbook: optional:** _[Think Java: How to Think Like a Computer
Scientist](http://greenteapress.com/thinkjava6/html/index.html) _, Allen B.
Downey and Chris Mayfield, Green Tea Press, 2016 [Available for free online].

## Grading

Grading for the course is based on a **1000-point scale**. Final letter grades
for the course will be determined using the following grading scale, based on
the total number of points achieved:

A | A- | B+ | B | B- | C+ | C | C- | D+ | D | D- | F  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
>= 930 | >= 900 | >= 870 | >= 830 | >= 800 | >= 770 | >= 730 | >= 700 | >= 670
| >= 630 | >= 600 | >= 000  
  
Students earn points by successfully completing assignments. Note that **no
assignment scores are dropped from your grade--instead, your grade is the sum
of all points earned on all assignments you complete**. The following table
indicates the point values for each type of assignment:

Activity | Possible Points  
---|---  
14 Weekly Reading Assignments | 8 pts each  
14 Weekly Lab Assignments | 10 pts each  
6 Program Assignments | 50 pts each  
8 Quizzes | 31 pts each  
1 Final Exam | 200 pts  
Total | 1000  
  
Grading of lab and program assignments in this course will be a bit different
than you typically see in other courses. We will be using a form of
_specifications grading_ , where the focus is on mastering the required skills
rather than point deductions for individual mistakes. Lab and program
assignments are instead graded on a four-valued categorical scale that is
similar in spirit to a pass/fail evaluation. However, you can repeat and
resubmit lab and program assignments to ensure you can demonstrate what you
have mastered.

Lab and programming assignments will be assessed on the following EMRN scale:

Grade | Meaning  
---|---  
(E) Excellent | Exceeds expectations with no nontrivial errors.  
(M) Meets Expectations | Meets expectations by clearly demonstrating intended
skills, with no significant gaps or errors, although some revision is needed.  
(R) Revision Needed | Partial understanding/skill is shown, but significant
gaps or errors are present requiring revision.  
(N) Not Assessable | The work is too fragmentary or has too many gaps to
assess whether there is understanding of the required concepts.  
  
Remember that you can revise and resubmit these assignments (within a defined
period) to increase your grade to the EMRN value you wish. For lab and program
assignments, M is the level expected to demonstrate an appropriate level of
mastery. Therefore, students receiving an M will receive full points for that
assignment. Students who receive an E grade for exceeding expectations with
few or no errors will earn 110% of the assignment's points (earning extra
credit). Students receiving R grades are expected to revise and resubmit their
work to Meet Expectations. Until the work is revised, R grades will earn 10%
of available points, while N grades will receive no credit.

To earn the E grade, you may have 2 Java style issues/errors/comments from
Web-CAT, all of your tests must pass, and no more than 1 of the Web-CAT tests
may fail.  
To earn the M grade, you may have up to 5 Java style issues/errors/comments,
you may not pass 1 of your tests, and no more than than 3 of the Web-CAT tests
may fail.  
More errors than this you will earn the R grade.  
If you code does not compile or run, it will earn the N grade.

### Free passes to repeat assignments (late policy)

Learning from mistakes is an important part of mastering any skill, especially
for novices. To enable this, you are allowed (and encouraged!) to revise and
resubmit your work on all assignments to demonstrate improved mastery, even
after you receive a grade on the work. For all reading assignments, labs, and
program assignments, you will receive electronic feedback as you work so that
you can revise and resubmit your work as many times as needed before the due
date. In addition, each student will begin the semester with **6 free passes**
that can be used to **resubmit revised work after the due date**. Free passes
are used according to the following constraints:

  * All work is due on the date specified for the assignment here on Canvas, and no late work will be accepted without the use of a free pass.
  * Free passes can be used on any reading assignment, lab assignment, program assignment, or quiz.
  * Students may use a maximum of one free pass per week (one assignment per week).
  * Assignments are not eligible to be resubmitted using a free pass until feedback has been released.
  * Past assignments will be available for free pass redemption on weekly cycles. Assignments will be available for **3 weekly cycles** after feedback has been released, and resubmission attempts for assignments can only be made during those 3 weeks (except for **quizzes, which are available for one resubmission in 1 weekly cycle** ). No resubmission is available after the last day of class meetings at the end of the semester.
  * Employing a free pass allows you to "re-open" a reading, lab, or programming assignment to make repeated submissions and receive automated feedback for an additional 24 hours on the day you pick within the weekly resubmission cycle. For quizzes, a free pass allows a student to re-take the quiz at a designated time on the Friday in that weekly resubmission cycle.
  * If you use all your free passes but find you need another one, you may use the free pass form to explain your situation and request an additional free pass.

See [your Free Pass count](/courses/204710/assignments/2302265 "Free Passes")
and access the form to cash in a free pass.

Weekly resubmission cycles run Friday/Saturday/Sunday each week starting the
second week of class. A free pass form will open each Monday with a list of
that week's assignments eligible for resubmission. Just fill out the form
between Monday-Thursday indicating which assignment you wish to resubmit
during that cycle and which day (Friday or Saturday or Sunday) you would like
to re-open the assignment. Free pass counts will be updated here on Canvas
(viewable in the gradebook and at the link above) at the conclusion of each
resubmission cycle. You are only eligible to use a free pass if you have one.
Any unused free passes you possess at the end of the semester will earn 1
point of extra credit each.

Since there are a limited number of weeks in the term, it is important that
you stay on top of your work as much as possible. Our resubmission policy is
designed such that you should only be using free passes rarely instead of
regularly. It is imperative for you to complete as much of each assignment,
preferably all of it, by its due date where possible. This will allow you to
receive feedback before resubmitting.

### Attendance and class participation

You are expected to attend both lecture and lab meetings **always**. Also,
strive to arrive **on time**. For labs, students **must attend** their
assigned lab sections--if you miss lab, you may not switch to a different lab
meeting time. If a serious illness prevents you from taking a quiz or test,
you may use a free pass to retake it. Also, note that **only the Dean's
office** can give permission for you to reschedule your final examination, and
no makeup final will be given without the Dean's approval.

### Communication

We will use Piazza as our forum board in this course. Piazza posts are
intended to be questions that could be answered by other students or the
course staff. Please do not post code on Piazza; it will be removed to prevent
honor code violations. Students are encouraged to check the forum board
frequently to see other students' questions and ask their own.

Piazza is _**not**_ intended as an alternative to email. If you have a
question that only an instructor can answer, please send your lecture
instructor an email. We  _ **will not**_ be answering any communication
through the Canvas message tool; use email, not Canvas. Our emails are posted
on the home page and at the top of this page.

Emails will typically be answered within 24-48 hours during business hours.
Please do not expect immediate responses.

If you have extenuating circumstances during the semester, please keep us
updated. It is easier for us to help you the sooner we know about any
potential problems.

### Reading Activities

  * There is no printed textbook for this course. Instead, all reading materials are presented through Reading Activities, appearing **weekly** , due on **Sunday nights**.

  * Here on Canvas, completely online, automatically graded.

  * This course used a **flipped classroom** approach where you are responsible for completing the readings on your own before class meetings in order to prepare for your class meetings. The class does not use traditional "lectures" where a teacher will repeat the material for you, so reading is a critical student responsibility.

  * Include a variety of interactive exercises for you to practice basic skills, including **syntax practice exercises** , **short programming exercises** , and end-of-activity **self-check questions**.

  * Can be repeated as many times as you like to receive full credit before the due date.

  * All students should be able to complete every Reading Activity with full credit by being persistent. Reading Activities are due weekly, typically on Sunday evenings.

  * **Late policy** : Reading Activities are due on the date and time specified. Late work is not accepted without the use of a free pass. Free passes can be used to re-open a reading assignment up to three weeks after the due date, for 24 hours of additional access for each free pass. Also, students are responsible for the material in the covered reading assignments on each in-class quiz, whether or not the reading has been completed on time.

### Lab Assignments

  * Posted **weekly** here on Canvas, due **at the end of your scheduled lab meeting period** , turned in online, and automatically graded. Do not attempt to submit work by email--it must be submitted to the automated grader using the instructions in the assignment. **Only your last (most recent) submission is used for scoring**.

  * In CS 1114, **You may not resubmit work you completed in a different semester--you must write assignments from scratch if you are repeating the course.**
  * Labs are posted at the start of the week for all lab sections. You cannot submit until your lab period, but everyone is encouraged to thoroughly read lab assignments in advance of their lab period, and students are strongly encouraged to do as much as possible on the lab activity before attending their lab period.

  * You must attend your lab section to complete and turn in your work. You will be assigned a lab partner each week to work with. Your goal is to address any unanswered questions that arose during your pre-lab work, electronically submit your work, and fix any problems or issues that are indicated. You and your partner will help each other in this process. **You must be present in your enrolled lab to get credit** for lab assignments. It is an honor code violation to submit in-lab assignments remotely outside of lab. Students **arriving more than 15 minutes late for lab will be not be able to receive credit** for the assignment.

  * Each lab also includes a post-lab quiz. After electronically turning in your program work during your lab period, you will help your partner with any issues so that you can both complete the work and turn it in individually. Then you will close out the lab by taking a short post-lab quiz (you can help each other here, too). Students **may not leave their lab period early** unless all partners have completed and turned in the lab programming assignment including the post-lab quiz.

  * While you will work with a partner during lab, lab assignments are still individual work: each student is responsible for writing and turning in their own lab work and post-lab quiz.

  * Note that students with a wide variety of programming backgrounds are in class. Some students who have extensive prior programming experience may be able to complete lab assignments before their lab meeting on their own, but this class is not aimed at those students. So don't be intimidated if your partner shows up to lab with their work already completed. Students with less programming experience may need to ask questions or receive assistance if they go down the wrong path, and that is what the lab TAs are for. All students are expected to be able to complete labs by the end of their lab period after asking any relevant questions to their lab TA(s), if they are keeping up with course materials and preparing in advance. Be sure to come to lab prepared, since your lab partner is not expected to carry you or make up for lack of preparation.

  * You can repeat and resubmit your lab work as many times as you like before the deadline.

  * **Late policy** : Lab submissions end at the conclusion of your lab period. Late work is not accepted without the use of a free pass. Free passes can be used to re-open a lab assignment up to three times during the resubmission cycles where the lab is available, for 24 hours of additional access for each free pass. Also, students are responsible for the skills and techniques covered in lab assignments on later labs, programming assignments, and quizzes, whether or not the lab has been completed on time.

### Program Assignments

  * Posted **weekly** here on Canvas, due on **Wednesday nights** , turned in online, receiving both an automatic grade and hand-grading by TAs. Do not attempt to submit work by email--it must be submitted to the automated grader using the instructions in the assignment. Only your last (most recent) submission is used for scoring.

  * Done outside of class time, on your own.

  * In CS 1114, **You may not resubmit work you completed in a different semester--you must write assignments from scratch if you are repeating the course.**
  * Program assignments are individual work: each student is responsible for writing and turning in their own program solutions. You may not collaborate with anyone else or copy code from other authors in completing your programming assignments.

  * Note that students with a wide variety of programming backgrounds are in class. Some students who have extensive prior programming experience may be able to complete programming assignments much more easily, while other students may take more time and more learning. Do not be intimidated by the performance of other students who start out with more experience, since they have essentially taken this course before, or at least mastered most of the knowledge taught here--this course is not for them.

  * You can repeat and resubmit your program assignment work as many times as you like before the deadline.

  * **Late policy** : Program Assignments are due on the date and time specified. Late work is not accepted without the use of a free pass. Free passes can be used to re-open a program assignment up to three times during the resubmission cycles where the program assignment is available, for 24 hours of additional access for each free pass. Also, students are responsible for the skills and techniques covered in program assignments on later labs, programming assignments, and quizzes, whether or not the program has been completed on time.

### In-class Quizzes

  * Given in-class approximately every other week.

  * **All quizzes use Lockdown Browser.**
  * This course has no midterm exams or tests--these more frequent, shorter in-class quizzes are used instead.

  * Quizzes are "closed notes, closed web"--no outside information, tools, or resources can be used while taking quizzes.

  * **Late Policy** : students must take in-class quizzes at the scheduled time. If you are absent during a quiz, you may use a free pass. Free passes can be used to re-take a quiz **once** during a scheduled quiz retake meeting (usually on Friday, the week following the quiz). Unlike other assignment types, quizzes are only available for one resubmission cycle and only one free pass can be used on each.

## The Virginia Tech Honor Code

The Undergraduate Honor Code pledge that each member of the university
community agrees to abide by states:

> _“As a Hokie, I will conduct myself with honor and integrity at all times. I
> will not lie, cheat, or steal, nor will I accept the actions of those who
> do.”_

Students enrolled in this course are responsible for abiding by the [Honor
Code](https://www.honorsystem.vt.edu/). A student who has doubts about how the
Honor Code applies to any assignment is responsible for obtaining specific
guidance from the course instructor before submitting the assignment for
evaluation. Students are strongly encouraged to consult their faculty members
regarding the use of any outside materials as the misuse of these sources may
constitute a violation of the Honor Code. Ignorance of the rules does not
exclude any member of the University community from the requirements and
expectations of the Honor Code.

All assignments submitted shall be considered “graded work” and all aspects of
your coursework are covered by the Honor Code. All projects, homework
assignments, readings, and quizzes are to be completed individually in this
course unless otherwise specified. All written work must be written without
help from other sources or people, except for the course instructor, the
course TAs, and Student Success Center tutors. **It is a violation of the
Honor Code in this course to receive help from any other source, including
online tutoring sites (including but not limited to Chegg, CourseHero, or
GroupMe), or generative AI tools (including but not limited to ChatGPT, GitHub
Copilot, and Microsoft Copilot).**

The Academic Integrity expectations for Hokies are the same in an online class
as they are in an in-person class. Hokies are expected to meet the academic
integrity standards at Virginia Tech at all times.

In this course, you may freely offer and receive verbal assistance with your
classmates on how to use the programming language, what library classes or
methods do, what errors mean, or how to interpret assignment instructions.
However, you **may not give or receive help from others while working on your
program code or any graded assignments** except lab assignments while working
in your lab section. When writing program code for all class assignments, you
_must work alone while typing at the keyboard, or when viewing your source
code on the screen_ (except for when working in your lab meeting on lab
assignments--see below). It is OK to work in the Undergraduate Learning Center
(McBryde 106 or Torgersen 1070), **as long as you are not asking for or
receiving assistance from others** (except course TAs or Student Success
Center tutors). This includes **showing code to other students or viewing code
written by other students**.

**Labs:**  all lab work is turned in individually and must bear your name.
**During lab periods only** , you may freely offer and receive verbal
assistance on lab tasks with your assigned lab partner(s) or any other student
in your lab section (but you may not copy anyone else's code!). During lab
period only, you are also welcome to help your partner(s) or other students
debug or troubleshoot their own code, and are free to seek assistance from
your partner(s) or other students with your own coding issues on the lab
assignment. However, this form of collaboration is reserved for only your
scheduled lab meeting room and time, not for any work done outside of your lab
meeting room and time.

Any writing or discussion of program source code must adhere to the limits
expressed above. If asking questions in the course online discussion areas, do
not post code unless it is relevant to your question, and limit the included
code to only the line(s) relevant (typically a handful of lines or less).

Commission of any of the following acts shall constitute academic misconduct.
This listing is not, however, exclusive of other acts that may reasonably be
said to constitute academic misconduct. Clarification is provided for each
definition with some examples of prohibited behaviors in the [Undergraduate
Honor Code Manual](https://www.honorsystem.vt.edu/):

  1. CHEATING   
Cheating includes the intentional use of unauthorized materials, information,
notes, study aids or other devices or materials in any academic exercise, or
attempts thereof.

  2. PLAGIARISM   
Plagiarism includes the copying of the language, structure, programming,
computer code, ideas, and/or thoughts of another and passing off the same as
one's own original work, or attempts thereof. In CS 1114, **You may not copy
code from another on any assignment.**

  3. FALSIFICATION   
Falsification includes the statement of any untruth, either verbally or in
writing, with respect to any element of one's academic work, or attempts
thereof.

  4. FABRICATION   
Fabrication includes making up data and results, and recording or reporting
them, or submitting fabricated documents, or attempts thereof.

  5. MULTIPLE SUBMISSION   
Multiple submission involves the submission for credit of substantial portions
of any work (including oral reports) previously submitted for credit at any
academic institution, or attempts thereof. In CS 1114, **You may not resubmit
work you completed in a different semester--you must write assignments from
scratch if you are repeating the course.**

  6. COMPLICITY   
Complicity includes intentionally helping another to engage in an act of
academic misconduct, or attempts thereof.

Note that all electronic work submitted for this course is archived and
subjected to automatic plagiarism detection and cheating analysis!

If you have questions or are unclear about what constitutes academic
misconduct on an assignment, please speak with your instructor. We take the
Honor Code seriously in this course. The normal sanction we will recommend for
a violation of the Honor Code is an **F* sanction** as your final course
grade. The F represents failure in the course. The identifies “*” a student
who has failed to uphold the values of academic integrity at Virginia Tech. A
student who receives a sanction of F* as their final course grade shall have
it documented on their transcript with the notation “FAILURE DUE TO ACADEMIC
HONOR CODE VIOLATION.” You would be required to complete an education program
administered by the Honor System in order to have the “*” and notation
“FAILURE DUE TO ACADEMIC HONOR CODE VIOLATION” removed from your transcript.
The “F” however would be permanently on your transcript.

## Virginia Tech Community Wellness Commitment

Virginia Tech is committed to protecting the health and safety of all members
of its community. **By participating in this class, all students agree to
abide by the Virginia Tech Wellness principles** (<https://www.vt.edu/public-
health.html>) **. Be respectful of the well-being of others, as well as
individual choices about masking. Students who prefer to wear masks in class
are always welcome to do so.**

## Student Well-Being Support

Supporting the mental health and well-being of students in our class is of
high priority to us and Virginia Tech. If you are feeling overwhelmed
academically, having trouble functioning, or are worried about a friend,
please reach out to any of the following offices:

  * Cook Counseling: 
    * 540-231-6557 to schedule an appointment and/or 24/7 crisis support
    * [ucc.vt.edu](https://ucc.vt.edu/) for more information
  * Dean of Students Office: 
    * 540-231-3787 for general advice
    * 540-231-6411 for after-hours crisis
    * [dos.vt.edu](https://dos.vt.edu/) for more information
  * Hokie Wellness: 
    * [hokiewellness.vt.edu](https://hokiewellness.vt.edu/) for more information about health and wellness workshops and consultations
  * Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
    * 540-231-3788 or [ssd.vt.edu](https://ssd.vt.edu/) for more information about accommodations and other disability-related supports
    * Any student who has been confirmed by the University as having special needs for learning must notify me by email in the first week of the course--work through SSD so they can send electronic notification of any accommodations.
  * Student Success Center: 
    * The Student Success Center helps students develop the skills needed to accomplish their academic goals and become self-directed learners. Their free services include individual and group tutoring, peer academic coaching, a Seminar Series on Academic Success, and more. Students can book appointments through Navigate. For instructions and more information, please visit [www.studentsuccess.vt.edu](https://studentsuccess.vt.edu/).

For a full listing of campus resources check out [well-
being.vt.edu](https://well-being.vt.edu/).

Please also feel free to speak with any of the instructors. We will make an
effort to work with you; we care about you.

## Academic Accommodations

Virginia Tech welcomes students with disabilities into the University’s
educational programs. The University promotes efforts to provide equal access
and a culture of inclusion without altering the essential elements of
coursework. If you anticipate or experience academic barriers that may be due
to disability, including but not limited to, chronic medical conditions, Deaf
or hard of hearing, learning disability, mental health, or vision impairment,
please contact the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
(540-231-3788, [ssd@vt.edu](mailto:ssd@vt.edu), or visit
[ssd.vt.edu](https://ssd.vt.edu)). If you have an SSD accommodation letter,
please meet with your instructor privately during office hours as early in the
semester as possible to discuss implementing your accommodations. You must
give reasonable notice to implement your accommodations, which is generally 5
business days and 10 business days for final exams.

URL: https://canvas.vt.edu/courses/204710/assignments/syllabus
