# Journal 5 
## I remember prompt: 
I remember today in class resarching the Secret Service's most wanted list and Interpol's most wanted list because the guy next to me was talking about hawk tuah coins and the rug pull scam that took place. I remember looking it up during the time I was supposed to be writing this and reading her wikipedia page to be astonished by the fact that her meme coin reached 500 million dollar market cap before plumeting to 25 million. I remember thinking "Holy crap! That is insane!". I remember the two professors talked about something to the side while I tried to look busy writing this for five minutes. I remember reading somewhere on the wikipedia page that it said that in November 2024 a fake screenshot of a CNN article claimed that more then 75k votes counted in the 2024 presidential US elections were write ins for Hawk Tuah which I thought was hilarious that that was deemed sufficiently important to add to her Wikipedia page. I remember think man this 5 minutes has been going on for like 10 minutes at least. And then the professor said "One more minute". I thought what else could I look up or write about to look busy for this singular last minute but my creativity escaped me. Alas I had to write regardless, it felt like almost my civic duty after I missed class last week due to personal situations. I felt indebted to attend, to participate, to show interest, as to try to fix what I assumed to be strained relations between me and the professors. 
