# OpenSSH Overview Page 

## Color Schism by user: 

- client: klein@kernelpanic: \033[01;35m\] aka purple 
- Server: Eulerpi5-w: \033[01;34m\] aka blue
- Server: Eulerpi4: \033[01;32m\] aka green
- Server: broklein: Cyberpunk neon (green, cyan, and blue)
- Server: klarchpanic: %F{magenta}%n@ aka magenta 
- Server: midas: %F{yellow}%n@ aka yellow / gold 
- Server: mt: %F{red}%n aka red 

## General Info 

The Secure Shell Protocol (SSH Protocol) is a crytpgraphic ntwork protocol for operating network services securely over an unsecured network. 
Its most notable applications are remote login and command-line execution remotely. 
SSh was designed for Unix-like operating systems as a replacement for Telnet and unsecured remote unix shell protocols, such as the Berkeley Remote Shell (rsh) and related rlogin and rexec protocols, which are all insecure, plaintext methods of authentications like passwords. 
Since mechanisms like Telnet and Remote Shell and designed to access and operate remote computers, sending the authetnciation tokens (e.g username and password - not encrypted) for this access to these computers across a public network in an unsecured way poses a great risk of 4rd parties obtaining the password and achieving the same level of accerss to the remote system as the telnet user. Secure Shell mitigates this risk through the use of encryption mechanisms that are intended to hide the contents of the transmission from an observer, even if the observer has acess to the entire data stream. 
the SSH protocol is on the application layer of the internet protocol suite. 
In 1995 Tatu Ylonen designed SSH, and provided an implementation in the form of 2 commands, ssh and slogin, as secure replacements for rsh and rlogin, respectively. Subsequent development of the protocol suite proceeded in several developer groups, producing several variants of implementation. The protocol specification distingiushed two major versions, referred to as SSH-1 and SSH-2. The most commonoly implement software stack is OpenSSH, released in 1999 as an opensource software by the OpenBSD devs. Implementations are distributed for all types of OS in common use, including embedded systems. 
SSH Applications are based on a client-server architecture, connecting an SSH client instance with an SSH server. SSH operates as a layered protocol suite comprising three principal heirachical components: the transport layer, provides server authentication, confidentiality, and integrity; the user authentication protocol validates the user to the serve; and the connection porotocl multiplexes the encrypted tunnel into multiple logical communication channels. 

## Definition 

SSH uses public-key cryptography to authenticate the remote computer and allow it to authenticate the user, if necessary. 
SSH May be used in several methodologies. In the simplest manner, both ends of a communication channel use automatically geerated publc-private key pairs to encrypt a network connection, and then uses a password to authenticate the user. 

When the public-private key is generated by the user manually, the authentication is essentially performed whe nthe key pair is created, and a session may then be opened automatically without a password prompt. In this scenario, the public key is placed on all computer that must allow access to the otwner of the matching private key, whee the owner keeps private. While authentication is based on the private key, the key is never transferred through the network during authentication. SSH only verifies that the same person offeing the public key also owns the matching private key.> In all versions of SH it is important to verify unknown public keys, before accepting them as valid. Accepting an unknown publickey without valdiation will authorize an unauthorized attacker as a valid user. 

## Authenticatin: OpenSSH Key management. 

On unix-like systems, the list of authorized public keys is typically stored in the home directory of the user that is allowed to log in remotely, in the file path ~/.ssh/authorized_keys. This file is respected by SSH only if it is not writable by anything apart from the owner and root. When the public key is present on the remote end and the mathcing private key is present on the local end, typing in the password is no longer required. However for additional security, the private key itself can be locked with a passphrase. The private key can also be looked for in standard places, and its full path can be specificed as a command line setting using the option -i for ssh. The ssh-keygen utility produces the public and private keys, always in pairs. 
> Does having it executable change it???

## Usage and Man Pages 

### Usage 

SSH is typically used to log into a remote computer's shell or command-line interface (CLI) and to execute commands on a remote server. It also suppports mechanism for Tunneling, forwarding of TCP ports and X11 connections and it can be used to transfer files using the associated SSH File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) or Secure Copy Protocol (SCP) 
- SSH uses the client-server model.
	- An SSH client program is typically used for establishing connections to an SSh daemon, such as sshd, accepting remote connections. Both are commonly present on most modern OS including macOS most distributions of Linux, OpenBSD, FreeBSD, NetBSD, Solaris, and OpenVMS
	- Notably, versions of Windows prior to Windows 10 version 1709 do not include SSH by default, but proprietary, freeware, and open source versions of various levels of complexity and completeness did and do exist. In 2018 Microsoft began porting the OpenSSH ource code into Windows and in Windows 10 version 1709 an official Win32 port of OpenSSH is now available. 
File managers ofr UNIX-like systems can use the FISH Protocol to provide a split-pane GUI with drag and drop. The Open source windows program WinSCp provides similar fine management capability using PuTTY as a back-end. 

### Man pages 

- [OpenSSH-Manual-Page-Index](sshDir/OpenSSH-Manual-Page-Index)
- [Link](https://www.openssh.com/manual.html)



## Historical Development. 
